DOUGLAS  ADAMS    
THE  RESTAURANT  AT  THE  
END  OF  THE  UNIVERSE    
  
  
  
To  Jane  and  James    
  
with  many  thanks    
to  Geoffrey  Perkins  for  achieving  the  Improbable    
to  Paddy  Kingsland,  Lisa  Braun  and  Alick  Hale  Munro  for  helping  
him    
to  John  Lloyd  for  his  help  with  the  original  Milliways  script    
to  Simon  Brett  for  starting  the  whole  thing  off    
  
to  the  Paul  Simon  album  One  Trick  Pony  which  I  played  incessantly  
while  writing  this  book.  Five  years  is  far  too  long    
  
And  with  very  special  thanks  to  Jacqui  Graham  for  infinite  patience,  
kindness  and  food  in  adversity    
  
  
There  is  a  theory  which  states  that  if  ever  anyone  discovers  exactly  
what  the  Universe  is  for  and  why  it  is  here,  it  will  instantly  disappear  
and  be  replaced  by  something  even  more  bizarre  and  inexplicable.    
There  is  another  theory  which  states  that  this  has  already  
happened.    
  
  
  
  Chapter  1    
  
The  story  so  far:    
In  the  beginning  the  Universe  was  created.    
This  has  made  a  lot  of  people  very  angry  and  been  widely  regarded  
as  a  bad  move.    
Many  races  believe  that  it  was  created  by  some  sort  of  God,  
though  the  Jatravartid  people  of  Viltvodle  VI  believe  that  the  entire  
Universe  was  in  fact  sneezed  out  of  the  nose  of  a  being  called  the  
Great  Green  Arkleseizure.    
The  Jatravartids,  who  live  in  perpetual  fear  of  the  time  they  call  The  
Coming  of  The  Great  White  Handkerchief,  are  small  blue  creatures  
with  more  than  fifty  arms  each,  who  are  therefore  unique  in  being  the  
only  race  in  history  to  have  invented  the  aerosol  deodorant  before  
the  wheel.    
However,  the  Great  Green  Arkleseizure  Theory  is  not  widely  
accepted  outside  Viltvodle  VI  and  so,  the  Universe  being  the  puzzling  
place  it  is,  other  explanations  are  constantly  being  sought.    
For  instance,  a  race  of  hyperintelligent  pan-­‐dimensional  beings  
once  built  themselves  a  gigantic  supercomputer  called  Deep  Thought  
to  calculate  once  and  for  all  the  Answer  to  the  Ultimate  Question  of  
Life,  the  Universe,  and  Everything.    
For  seven  and  a  half  million  years,  Deep  Thought  computed  and  
calculated,  and  in  the  end  announced  that  the  answer  was  in  fact  
Forty-­‐two-­‐and  so  another,  even  bigger,  computer  had  to  be  built  to  
find  out  what  the  actual  question  was.    
And  this  computer,  which  was  called  the  Earth,  was  so  large  that  it  
was  frequently  mistaken  for  a  planet  ʹ  especially  by  the  strange  ape-­‐
like  beings  who  roamed  its  surface,  totally  unaware  that  they  were  
simply  part  of  a  gigantic  computer  program.    
And  this  is  very  odd,  because  without  that  fairly  simple  and  obvious  
piece  of  knowledge,  nothing  that  ever  happened  on  the  Earth  could  
possibly  make  the  slightest  bit  of  sense.    Sadly  however,  just  before  the  critical  moment  of  readout,  the  
Earth  was  unexpectedly  demolished  by  the  Vogons  to  make  way  ʹ  so  
they  claimed  ʹ  for  a  new  hyperspace  bypass,  and  so  all  hope  of  
discovering  a  meaning  for  life  was  lost  for  ever.    
Or  so  it  would  seem.    
Two  of  there  strange,  ape-­‐like  creatures  survived.    
Arthur  Dent  escaped  at  the  very  last  moment  because  an  old  friend  
of  his,  Ford  Prefect,  suddenly  turned  out  to  be  from  a  small  planet  in  
the  vicinity  of  Betelgeuse  and  not  from  Guildford  as  he  had  hitherto  
claimed;  and,  more  to  the  point,  he  knew  how  to  hitch  rides  on  flying  
saucers.    
Tricia  McMillian  ʹ  or  Trillian  ʹ  had  skipped  the  planet  six  months  
earlier  with  Zaphod  Beeblebrox,  the  then  President  of  the  Galaxy.    
Two  survivors.    
They  are  all  that  remains  of  the  greatest  experiment  ever  
conducted  ʹ  to  find  the  Ultimate  Question  and  the  Ultimate  Answer  
of  Life,  the  Universe,  and  Everything.    
And,  less  than  half  a  million  miles  from  where  their  starship  is  
drifting  lazily  through  the  inky  blackness  of  space,  a  Vogon  ship  is  
moving  slowly  towards  them.    
  
  
  
  Chapter  2    
  
Like  all  Vogon  ships  it  looked  as  if  it  had  been  not  so  much  
designed  as  congealed.  The  unpleasant  yellow  lumps  and  edifices  
which  protuded  from  it  at  unsightly  angles  would  have  disfigured  the  
looks  of  most  ships,  but  in  this  case  that  was  sadly  impossible.  Uglier  
things  have  been  spotted  in  the  skies,  but  not  by  reliable  witnesses.    
In  fact  to  see  anything  much  uglier  than  a  Vogon  ship  you  would  
have  to  go  inside  and  look  at  a  Vogon.  If  you  are  wise,  however,  this  is  
precisely  what  you  will  avoid  doing  because  the  average  Vogon  will  
not  think  twice  before  doing  something  so  pointlessly  hideous  to  you  
that  you  will  wish  you  had  never  been  born  ʹ  or  (if  you  are  a  clearer  
minded  thinker)  that  the  Vogon  had  never  been  born.    
In  fact,  the  average  Vogon  probably  wouldn't  even  think  once.  They  
are  simple-­‐minded,  thick-­‐willed,  slug-­‐brained  creatures,  and  thinking  
is  not  really  something  they  are  cut  out  for.  Anatomical  analysis  of  the  
Vogon  reveals  that  its  brain  was  originally  a  badly  deformed,  
misplaced  and  dyspeptic  liver.  The  fairest  thing  you  can  say  about  
them,  then,  is  that  they  know  what  they  like,  and  what  they  like  
generally  involves  hurting  people  and,  wherever  possible,  getting  very  
angry.    
One  thing  they  don't  like  is  leaving  a  job  unfinished  ʹ  particularly  
this  Vogon,  and  particularly  ʹ  for  various  reasons  ʹ  this  job.    
This  Vogon  was  Captain  Prostetnic  Vogon  Jeltz  of  the  Galactic  
Hyperspace  Planning  Council,  and  he  was  it  who  had  had  the  job  of  
demolishing  the  so-­‐called  "planet"  Earth.    
He  heaved  his  monumentally  vile  body  round  in  his  ill-­‐fitting,  slimy  
seat  and  stared  at  the  monitor  screen  on  which  the  starship  Heart  of  
Gold  was  being  systematically  scanned.    
It  mattered  little  to  him  that  the  Heart  of  Gold,  with  its  Infinite  
Improbability  Drive,  was  the  most  beautiful  and  revolutionary  ship  
ever  built.  Aesthetics  and  technology  were  closed  books  to  him  and,  
had  he  had  his  way,  burnt  and  buried  books  as  well.    It  mattered  even  less  to  him  that  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  was  aboard.  
Zaphod  Beeblebrox  was  now  the  ex-­‐President  of  the  Galaxy,  and  
though  every  police  force  in  the  Galaxy  was  currently  pursuing  both  
him  and  this  ship  he  had  stolen,  the  Vogon  was  not  interested.    
He  had  other  fish  to  fry.    
It  has  been  said  that  Vogons  are  not  above  a  little  bribery  and  
corruption  in  the  same  way  that  the  sea  is  not  above  the  clouds,  and  
this  was  certainly  true  in  his  case.  When  he  heard  the  words  
"integrity"  or  "moral  rectitude",  he  reached  for  his  dictionary,  and  
when  he  heard  the  chink  of  ready  money  in  large  quantities  he  
reached  for  the  rule  book  and  threw  it  away.    
In  seeking  so  implacably  the  destruction  of  the  Earth  and  all  that  
therein  lay  he  was  moving  somewhat  above  and  beyond  the  call  of  his  
professional  duty.  There  was  even  some  doubt  as  to  whether  the  said  
bypass  was  actually  going  to  be  built,  but  the  matter  had  been  
glossed  over.    
He  grunted  a  repellent  grunt  of  satisfaction.    
"Computer,"  he  croaked,  "get  me  my  brain  care  specialist  on  the  
line."    
Within  a  few  seconds  the  face  of  Gag  Halfrunt  appeared  on  the  
screen,  smiling  the  smile  of  a  man  who  knew  he  was  ten  light  years  
away  from  the  Vogon  face  he  was  looking  at.  Mixed  up  somewhere  in  
the  smile  was  a  glint  of  irony  too.  Though  the  Vogon  persistently  
referred  to  him  as  "my  private  brain  care  specialist"  there  was  not  a  
lot  of  brain  to  take  care  of,  and  it  was  in  fact  Halfrunt  who  was  
employing  the  Vogon.  He  was  paying  him  an  awful  lot  of  money  to  do  
some  very  dirty  work.  As  one  of  the  Galaxy's  most  prominent  and  
successful  psychiatrists,  he  and  a  consortium  of  his  colleagues  were  
quite  prepared  to  spend  an  awful  lot  of  money  when  it  seemed  that  
the  entire  future  of  psychiatry  might  be  at  stake.    
"Well,"  he  said,  "hello  my  Captain  of  Vogons  Prostetnic,  and  how  
are  we  feeling  today?"    
The  Vogon  captain  told  him  that  in  the  last  few  hours  he  had  wiped  
out  nearly  half  his  crew  in  a  disciplinary  exercise.    
Halfrunt's  smile  did  not  flicker  for  an  instant.    "Well,"  he  said,  "I  think  this  is  perfectly  normal  behaviour  for  a  
Vogon,  you  know?  The  natural  and  healthy  channelling  of  the  
aggressive  instincts  into  acts  of  senseless  violence."    
"That,"  rumbled  the  Vogon,  "is  what  you  always  say."    
"Well  again,"  said  Halfrunt,  "I  think  that  this  is  perfectly  normal  
behaviour  for  a  psychiatrist.  Good.  We  are  clearly  both  very  well  
adjusted  in  our  mental  attitudes  today.  Now  tell  me,  what  news  of  
the  mission?"    
"We  have  located  the  ship."    
"Wonderful,"  said  Halfrunt,  "wonderful!  and  the  occupants?"    
"The  Earthman  is  there."    
"Excellent!  And...?"    
"A  female  from  the  same  planet.  They  are  the  last."    
"Good,  good,"  beamed  Halfrunt,  "Who  else?"    
"The  man  Prefect."    
"Yes?"    
"And  Zaphod  Beeblebrox."    
For  an  instant  Halfrunt's  smile  flickered.    
"Ah  yes,"  he  said,  "I  had  been  expecting  this.  It  is  most  
regrettable."    
"A  personal  friend?"  inquired  the  Vogon,  who  had  heard  the  
expression  somewhere  once  and  decided  to  try  it  out.    
"Ah,  no,"  said  Halfrunt,  "in  my  profession  you  know,  we  do  not  
make  personal  friends."    
"Ah,"  grunted  the  Vogon,  "professional  detachment."    
"No,"  said  Halfrunt  cheerfully,  "we  just  don't  have  the  knack."    
He  paused.  His  mouth  continued  to  smile,  but  his  eyes  frowned  
slightly.    
"But  Beeblebrox,  you  know,"  he  said,  "he  is  one  of  my  most  
profitable  clients.  He  had  personality  problems  beyond  the  dreams  of  
analysts."    
He  toyed  with  this  thought  a  little  before  reluctantly  dismissing  it.    
"Still,"  he  said,  "you  are  ready  for  your  task?"    
"Yes."    
"Good.  Destroy  the  ship  immediately."    "What  about  Beeblebrox?"    
"Well,"  said  Halfrunt  brightly,  "Zaphod's  just  this  guy,  you  know?"    
He  vanished  from  the  screen.    
The  Vogon  Captain  pressed  a  communicator  button  which  
connected  him  with  the  remains  of  his  crew.    
"Attack,"  he  said.    
  
At  that  precise  moment  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  was  in  his  cabin  
swearing  very  loudly.  Two  hours  ago,  he  had  said  that  they  would  go  
for  a  quick  bite  at  the  Restaurant  at  the  End  of  the  Universe,  
whereupon  he  had  had  a  blazing  row  with  the  ship's  computer  and  
stormed  off  to  his  cabin  shouting  that  he  would  work  out  the  
Improbability  factors  with  a  pencil.    
The  Heart  of  Gold's  Improbability  Drive  made  it  the  most  powerful  
and  unpredictable  ship  in  existence.  There  was  nothing  it  couldn't  do,  
provided  you  knew  exactly  how  improbable  it  was  that  the  thing  you  
wanted  it  to  do  would  ever  happen.    
He  had  stolen  it  when,  as  President,  he  was  meant  to  be  launching  
it.  He  didn't  know  exactly  why  he  had  stolen  it,  except  that  he  liked  it.    
He  didn't  know  why  he  had  become  President  of  the  Galaxy,  except  
that  it  seemed  a  fun  thing  to  be.    
He  did  know  that  there  were  better  reasons  than  these,  but  that  
they  were  buried  in  a  dark,  locked  off  section  of  his  two  brains.  He  
wished  the  dark,  locked  off  section  of  his  two  brains  would  go  away  
because  they  occasionally  surfaced  momentarily  and  put  strange  
thoughts  into  the  light,  fun  sections  of  his  mind  and  tried  to  deflect  
him  from  what  he  saw  as  being  the  basic  business  of  his  life,  which  
was  to  have  a  wonderfully  good  time.    
At  the  moment  he  was  not  having  a  wonderfully  good  time.  He  had  
run  out  of  patience  and  pencils  and  was  feeling  very  hungry.    
"Starpox!"  he  shouted.    
At  that  same  precise  moment,  Ford  Prefect  was  in  mid  air.  This  was  
not  because  of  anything  wrong  with  the  ship's  artificial  gravity  field,  
but  because  he  was  leaping  down  the  stair-­‐well  which  led  to  the  
ship's  personal  cabins.  It  was  a  very  high  jump  to  do  in  one  bound  and  
he  landed  awkwardly,  stumbled,  recovered,  raced  down  the  corridor  sending  a  couple  of  miniature  service  robots  flying,  skidded  round  the  
corner,  burst  into  Zaphod's  door  and  explained  what  was  on  his  mind.    
"Vogons,"  he  said.    
A  short  while  before  this,  Arthur  Dent  had  set  out  from  his  cabin  in  
search  of  a  cup  of  tea.  It  was  not  a  quest  he  embarked  upon  with  a  
great  deal  of  optimism.,  because  he  knew  that  the  only  source  of  hot  
drinks  on  the  entire  ship  was  a  benighted  piece  of  equipment  
produced  by  the  Sirius  Cybernetics  Corporation.  It  was  called  a  Nutri-­‐
Matic  Drinks  Synthesizer,  and  he  had  encountered  it  before.    
It  claimed  to  produce  the  widest  possible  range  of  drinks  personally  
matched  to  the  tastes  and  metabolism  of  whoever  cared  to  use  it.  
When  put  to  the  test,  however,  it  invariably  produced  a  plastic  cup  
filled  with  a  liquid  that  was  almost,  but  nit  quite,  entirely  unlike  tea.    
He  attempted  to  reason  with  the  thing.    
"Tea,"  he  said.    
"Share  and  Enjoy,"  the  machine  replied  and  provided  him  with  yet  
another  cup  of  the  sickly  liquid.    
He  threw  it  away.    
"Share  and  enjoy,"  the  machine  repeated  and  provided  him  with  
another  one.    
"Share  and  Enjoy"  is  the  company  motto  of  the  hugely  successful  
Sirius  Cybernetics  Corporation  Complaints  division,  which  now  covers  
the  major  land  masses  of  three  medium  sized  planets  and  is  the  only  
part  of  the  Corporation  to  have  shown  a  consistent  profit  in  recent  
years.    
The  motto  stands  ʹ  or  rather  stood  ʹ  in  three  mile  high  illuminated  
letters  near  the  Complaints  Department  spaceport  on  Eadrax.  
Unfortunately  its  weight  was  such  that  shortly  after  it  was  erected,  
the  ground  beneath  the  letters  caved  in  and  they  dropped  for  nearly  
half  their  length  through  the  offices  of  many  talented  young  
complaints  executives  ʹ  now  deceased.    
The  protruding  upper  halves  of  the  letters  now  appear,  in  the  local  
language,  to  read  "Go  stick  your  head  in  a  pig",  and  are  no  longer  
illuminated,  except  at  times  of  special  celebration.    
Arthur  threw  away  a  sixth  cup  of  the  liquid.    "Listen,  you  machine,"  he  said,  "you  claim  you  can  synthesize  any  
drink  in  existence,  so  why  do  you  keep  giving  me  the  same  
undrinkable  stuff?"    
"Nutrition  and  pleasurable  sense  data,"  burbled  the  machine.  
"Share  and  Enjoy."    
"It  tastes  filthy!"    
"If  you  have  enjoyed  the  experience  of  this  drink,"  continued  the  
machine,  "why  not  share  it  with  your  friends?"    
"Because,"  said  Arthur  tartly,  "I  want  to  keep  them.  Will  you  try  to  
comprehend  what  I'm  telling  you?  That  drink..."    
"That  drink,"  said  the  machine  sweetly,  "was  individually  tailored  to  
meet  your  personal  requirements  for  nutrition  and  pleasure."    
"Ah,"  said  Arthur,  "so  I'm  a  masochist  on  diet  am  I?"    
"Share  and  Enjoy."    
"Oh  shut  up."    
"Will  that  be  all?"    
Arthur  decided  to  give  up.    
"Yes,"  he  said.    
Then  he  decided  he'd  be  dammed  if  he'd  give  up.    
"No,"  he  said,  "look,  it's  very,  very  simple...  all  I  want...  is  a  cup  of  
tea.  You  are  going  to  make  one  for  me.  Keep  quiet  and  listen."    
And  he  sat.  He  told  the  Nutri-­‐Matic  about  India,  he  told  it  about  
China,  he  told  it  about  Ceylon.  He  told  it  about  broad  leaves  drying  in  
the  sun.  He  told  it  about  silver  teapots.  He  told  it  about  summer  
afternoons  on  the  lawn.  He  told  it  about  putting  in  the  milk  before  the  
tea  so  it  wouldn't  get  scalded.  He  even  told  it  (briefly)  about  the  
history  of  the  East  India  Company.    
"So  that's  it,  is  it?"  said  the  Nutri-­‐Matic  when  he  had  finished.    
"Yes,"  said  Arthur,  "that  is  what  I  want."    
"You  want  the  taste  of  dried  leaves  boiled  in  water?"    
"Er,  yes.  With  milk."    
"Squirted  out  of  a  cow?"    
"Well,  in  a  manner  of  speaking  I  suppose..."    "I'm  going  to  need  some  help  with  this  one,"  said  the  machine  
tersely.  All  the  cheerful  burbling  had  dropped  out  of  its  voice  and  it  
now  meant  business.    
"Well,  anything  I  can  do,"  said  Arthur.    
"You've  done  quite  enough,"  the  Nutri-­‐Matic  informed  him.    
It  summoned  up  the  ship's  computer.    
"Hi  there!"  said  the  ship's  computer.    
The  Nutri-­‐Matic  explained  about  tea  to  the  ship's  computer.  The  
computer  boggled,  linked  logic  circuits  with  the  Nutri-­‐Matic  and  
together  they  lapsed  into  a  grim  silence.    
Arthur  watched  and  waited  for  a  while,  but  nothing  further  
happened.    
He  thumped  it,  but  still  nothing  happened.    
Eventually  he  gave  up  and  wandered  up  to  the  bridge.    
  
In  the  empty  wastes  of  space,  the  Heart  of  Gold  hung  still.  Around  
it  blazed  the  billion  pinpricks  of  the  Galaxy.  Towards  it  crept  the  ugly  
yellow  lump  of  the  Vogon  ship.    
  
  
  
  Chapter  3    
  
"Does  anyone  have  a  kettle?"  Arthur  asked  as  he  walked  on  to  the  
bridge,  and  instantly  began  to  wonder  why  Trillian  was  yelling  at  the  
computer  to  talk  to  her,  Ford  was  thumping  it  and  Zaphod  was  kicking  
it,  and  also  why  there  was  a  nasty  yellow  lump  on  the  vision  screen.    
He  put  down  the  empty  cup  he  was  carrying  and  walked  over  to  
them.    
"Hello?"  he  said.    
At  that  moment  Zaphod  flung  himself  over  to  the  polished  marble  
surfaces  that  contained  the  instruments  that  controlled  the  
conventional  photon  drive.  They  materialized  beneath  his  hands  and  
he  flipped  over  to  manual  control.  He  pushed,  he  pulled,  he  pressed  
and  he  swore.  The  photon  drive  gave  a  sickly  judder  and  cut  out  again.    
"Something  up?"  said  Arthur.    
"Hey,  didja  hear  that?"  muttered  Zaphod  as  he  leapt  now  for  the  
manual  controls  of  the  Infinite  Improbability  Drive,  "the  monkey  
spoke!"    
The  Improbability  Drive  gave  two  small  whines  and  then  also  cut  
out.    
"Pure  history,  man,"  said  Zaphod,  kicking  the  Improbability  Drive,  
"a  talking  monkey!"    
"If  you're  upset  about  something..."  said  Arthur.    
"Vogons!"  snapped  Ford,  "we're  under  attack!"    
Arthur  gibbered.    
"Well  what  are  you  doing?  Let's  get  out  of  here!"    
"Can't.  Computer's  jammed."    
"Jammed?"    
"It  says  all  its  circuits  are  occupied.  There's  no  power  anywhere  in  
the  ship."    
Ford  moved  away  from  the  computer  terminal,  wiped  a  sleeve  
across  his  forehead  and  slumped  back  against  the  wall.    "Nothing  we  can  do,"  he  said.  He  glared  at  nothing  and  bit  his  lip.    
When  Arthur  had  been  a  boy  at  school,  long  before  the  Earth  had  
been  demolished,  he  had  used  to  play  football.  He  had  not  been  at  all  
good  at  it,  and  his  particular  speciality  had  been  scoring  own  goals  in  
important  matches.  Whenever  this  happened  he  used  to  experience  a  
peculiar  tingling  round  the  back  of  his  neck  that  would  slowly  creep  
up  across  his  cheeks  and  heat  his  brow.  The  image  of  mud  and  grass  
and  lots  of  little  jeering  boys  flinging  it  at  him  suddenly  came  vividly  
to  his  mind  at  this  moment.    
A  peculiar  tingling  sensation  at  the  back  of  his  neck  was  creeping  
up  across  his  cheeks  and  heating  his  brow.    
He  started  to  speak,  and  stopped.    
He  started  to  speak  again  and  stopped  again.    
Finally  he  managed  to  speak.    
"Er,"  he  said.  He  cleared  his  throat.    
"Tell  me,"  he  continued,  and  said  it  so  nervously  that  the  others  all  
turned  to  stare  at  him.  He  glanced  at  the  approaching  yellow  blob  on  
the  vision  screen.    
"Tell  me,"  he  said  again,  "did  the  computer  say  what  was  occupying  
it?  I  just  ask  out  of  interest..."    
Their  eyes  were  riveted  on  him.    
"And,  er...  well  that's  it  really,  just  asking."    
Zaphod  put  out  a  hand  and  held  Arthur  by  the  scruff  of  the  neck.    
"What  have  you  done  to  it,  Monkeyman?"  he  breathed.    
"Well,"  said  Arthur,  "nothing  in  fact.  It's  just  that  I  think  a  short  
while  ago  it  was  trying  to  work  out  how  to..."    
"Yes?"    
"Make  me  some  tea."    
"That's  right  guys,"  the  computer  sang  out  suddenly,  "just  coping  
with  that  problem  right  now,  and  wow,  it's  a  biggy.  Be  with  you  in  a  
while."  It  lapsed  back  into  a  silence  that  was  only  matched  for  sheer  
intensity  by  the  silence  of  the  three  people  staring  at  Arthur  Dent.    
As  if  to  relieve  the  tension,  the  Vogons  chose  that  moment  to  start  
firing.    
  The  ship  shook,  the  ship  thundered.  Outside,  the  inch  thick  force-­‐
shield  around  it  blistered,  crackled  and  spat  under  the  barrage  of  a  
dozen  30-­‐Megahurt  Definit-­‐Kil  Photrazon  Cannon,  and  looked  as  if  it  
wouldn't  be  around  for  long.  Four  minutes  is  how  long  Ford  Prefect  
gave  it."Three  minutes  and  fifty  seconds,"  he  said  a  short  while  later.    
"Forty-­‐five  seconds,"  he  added  at  the  appropriate  time.  He  flicked  
idly  at  some  useless  switches,  then  gave  Arthur  an  unfriendly  look.    
"Dying  for  a  cup  of  tea,  eh?"  he  said.  "Three  minutes  and  forty  
seconds."    
"Will  you  stop  counting!"  snarled  Zaphod.    
"Yes,"  said  Ford  Prefect,  "in  three  minutes  and  thirty-­‐five  seconds."    
  
Aboard  the  Vogon  ship,  Prostetnic  Vogon  Jeltz  was  puzzled.  He  had  
expected  a  chase,  he  had  expected  an  exciting  grapple  with  tractor  
beams,  he  had  expected  to  have  to  use  the  specially  installed  Sub-­‐
Cyclic  Normality  Assert-­‐i-­‐Tron  to  counter  the  Heart  of  Gold's  Infinite  
Improbability  Drive,  but  the  Sub-­‐Cyclic  Normality  Assert-­‐i-­‐Tron  lay  idle  
as  the  Heart  of  Gold  just  sat  there  and  took  it.    
A  dozen  30-­‐Megahurt  Definit-­‐Kil  Photrazon  Cannon  continued  to  
blaze  away  at  the  Heart  of  Gold,  and  still  it  just  sat  there  and  took  it.    
He  tested  every  sensor  at  his  disposal  to  see  if  there  was  any  subtle  
trickery  afoot,  but  no  subtle  trickery  was  to  be  found.    
He  didn't  know  about  the  tea  of  course.    
Nor  did  he  know  exactly  how  the  occupants  of  the  Heart  of  Gold  
were  spending  the  last  three  minutes  and  thirty  seconds  of  life  they  
had  left  to  spend.    
  
Quite  how  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  arrived  at  the  idea  of  holding  a  
seance  at  this  point  is  something  he  was  never  quite  clear  on.    
Obviously  the  subject  of  death  was  in  the  air,  but  more  as  
something  to  be  avoided  than  harped  upon.    
Possibly  the  horror  that  Zaphod  experienced  at  the  prospect  of  
being  reunited  with  his  deceased  relatives  led  on  to  the  thought  that  
they  might  just  feel  the  same  way  about  him  and,  what's  more,  be  
able  to  do  something  about  helping  to  postpone  this  reunion.    Or  again  it  might  just  have  been  one  of  the  strange  promptings  that  
occasionally  surfaced  from  that  dark  area  of  his  mind  that  he  had  
inexplicably  locked  off  prior  to  becoming  President  of  the  Galaxy.    
"You  want  to  talk  to  your  great  grandfather?"  boggled  Ford.    
"Yeah."    
"Does  it  have  to  be  now?"    
The  ship  continued  to  shake  and  thunder.  The  temperature  was  
rising.  The  light  was  getting  dimmer  ʹ  all  the  energy  the  computer  
didn't  require  for  thinking  about  tea  was  being  pumped  into  the  
rapidly  fading  force-­‐field.    
"Yeah!"  insisted  Zaphod.  "Listen  Ford,  I  think  he  may  be  able  to  
help  us."    
"Are  you  sure  you  mean  think?  Pick  your  words  with  care."    
"Suggest  something  else  we  can  do."    
"Er,  well..."    
"OK,  round  the  central  console.  Now.  Come  on!  Trillian,  
Monkeyman,  move."    
They  clustered  round  the  central  console  in  confusion,  sat  down  
and,  feeling  exceptionally  foolish,  held  hands.  With  his  third  hand  
Zaphod  turned  off  the  lights.    
Darkness  gripped  the  ship.    
Outside,  the  thunderous  roar  of  the  Definit-­‐Kil  cannon  continued  to  
rip  at  the  force-­‐field.    
"Concentrate,"  hissed  Zaphod,  "on  his  name."    
"What  is  it?"  asked  Arthur.    
"Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  Fourth."    
"What?"    
"Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  Fourth.  Concentrate!"    
"The  Fourth?"    
"Yeah.  Listen,  I'm  Zaphod  Beeblebrox,  my  father  was  Zaphod  
Beeblebrox  the  Second,  my  grandfather  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  
Third..."    
"What?"    
"There  was  an  accident  with  a  contraceptive  and  a  time  machine.  
Now  concentrate!"    "Three  minutes,"  said  Ford  Prefect.    
"Why,"  said  Arthur  Dent,  "are  we  doing  this?"    
"Shut  up,"  suggested  Zaphod  Beeblebrox.    
Trillian  said  nothing.  What,  she  thought,  was  there  to  say?    
The  only  light  on  the  bridge  came  from  two  dim  red  triangles  in  a  
far  corner  where  Marvin  the  Paranoid  Android  sat  slumped,  ignoring  
all  and  ignored  by  all,  in  a  private  and  rather  unpleasant  world  of  his  
own.    
Round  the  central  console  four  figures  hunched  in  tight  
concentration  trying  to  blot  from  their  minds  the  terrifying  
shuddering  of  the  ship  and  the  fearful  roar  that  echoed  through  it.    
They  concentrated.    
Still  they  concentrated.    
And  still  they  concentrated.    
The  seconds  ticked  by.    
On  Zaphod's  brow  stood  beads  of  sweat,  first  of  concentration,  
then  of  frustration  and  finally  of  embarrassment.    
At  last  he  let  out  a  cry  of  anger,  snatched  back  his  hands  from  
Trillian  and  Ford  and  stabbed  at  the  light  switch.    
"Ah,  I  was  beginning  to  think  you'd  never  turn  the  lights  on,"  said  a  
voice.  "No,  not  too  bright  please,  my  eyes  aren't  what  they  once  
were."    
Four  figures  jolted  upright  in  their  seats.  Slowly  they  turned  their  
heads  to  look,  though  their  scalps  showed  a  distinct  propensity  to  try  
and  stay  in  the  same  place.    
"Now.  Who  disturbs  me  at  this  time?"  said  the  small,  bent,  gaunt  
figure  standing  by  the  sprays  of  fern  at  the  far  end  of  the  bridge.  His  
two  small  wispy-­‐haired  heads  looked  so  ancient  that  it  seemed  they  
might  hold  dim  memories  of  the  birth  of  the  galaxies  themselves.  One  
lolled  in  sleep,  but  the  other  squinted  sharply  at  them.  If  his  eyes  
weren't  what  they  once  were,  they  must  once  have  been  diamond  
cutters.    
Zaphod  stuttered  nervously  for  a  moment.  He  gave  the  intricate  
little  double  nod  which  is  the  traditional  Betelgeusian  gesture  of  
familial  respect.    
"Oh...  er,  hi  Great  Granddad..."  he  breathed.    The  little  old  figure  moved  closer  towards  them.  He  peered  
through  the  dim  light.  He  thrust  out  a  bony  finger  at  his  great  
grandson.    
"Ah,"  he  snapped.  "Zaphod  Beeblebrox.  The  last  of  our  great  line.  
Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  Nothingth."    
"The  First."    
"The  Nothingth,"  spat  the  figure.  Zaphod  hated  his  voice.  It  always  
seemed  to  him  to  screech  like  fingernails  across  the  blackboard  of  
what  he  liked  to  think  of  as  his  soul.    
He  shifted  awkwardly  in  his  seat.    
"Er,  yeah,"  he  muttered,  "Er,  look,  I'm  really  sorry  about  the  
flowers,  I  meant  to  send  them  along,  but  you  know,  the  shop  was  
fresh  out  of  wreaths  and..."    
"You  forget!"  snapped  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  Fourth.    
"Well..."    
"Too  busy.  Never  think  of  other  people.  The  living  are  all  the  
same."    
"Two  minutes,  Zaphod,"  whispered  Ford  in  an  awed  whisper.    
Zaphod  fidgeted  nervously.    
"Yeah,  but  I  did  mean  to  send  them,"  he  said.  "And  I'll  write  to  my  
great  grandmother  as  well,  just  as  soon  as  we  get  out  of  this..."    
"Your  great  grandmother,"  mused  the  gaunt  little  figure  to  himself.    
"Yeah,"  said  Zaphod,  "Er,  how  is  she?  Tell  you  what,  I'll  go  and  see  
her.  But  first  we've  just  got  to..."    
"Your  late  great  grandmother  and  I  are  very  well,"  rasped  Zaphod  
Beeblebrox  the  Fourth.    
"Ah.  Oh."    
"But  very  disappointed  in  you,  young  Zaphod..."    
"Yeah  well..."  Zaphod  felt  strangely  powerless  to  take  charge  of  this  
conversation,  and  Ford's  heavy  breathing  at  his  side  told  him  that  the  
seconds  were  ticking  away  fast.  The  noise  and  the  shaking  had  
reached  terrifying  proportions.  He  saw  Trillian  and  Arthur's  faces  
white  and  unblinking  in  the  gloom.    
"Er,  Great  Grandfather..."    
"We've  been  following  your  progress  with  considerable  
despondency..."    "Yeah,  look,  just  at  the  moment  you  see..."    
"Not  to  say  contempt!"    
"Could  you  sort  of  listen  for  a  moment..."    
"I  mean  what  exactly  are  you  doing  with  your  life?"    
"I'm  being  attacked  by  a  Vogon  fleet!"  cried  Zaphod.  It  was  an  
exaggeration,  but  it  was  his  only  opportunity  so  far  of  getting  the  
basic  point  of  the  exercise  across.    
"Doesn't  surprise  me  in  the  least,"  said  the  little  old  figure  with  a  
shrug.    
"Only  it's  happening  right  now  you  see,"  insisted  Zaphod  feverishly.    
The  spectral  ancestor  nodded,  picked  up  the  cup  Arthur  Dent  had  
brought  in  and  looked  at  it  with  interest.    
"Er...  Great  Granddad..."    
"Did  you  know,"  interrupting  the  ghostly  figure,  fixing  Zaphod  with  
a  stern  look,  "that  Betelgeuse  Five  has  developed  a  very  slight  
eccentricy  in  its  orbit?"    
Zaphod  didn't  and  found  the  information  hard  to  concentrate  on  
what  with  all  the  noise  and  the  imminence  of  death  and  so  on.    
"Er,  no...  look,"  he  said.    
"Me  spinning  in  my  grave!"  barked  the  ancestor.  He  slammed  the  
cup  down  and  pointed  a  quivering,  stick-­‐like  see-­‐through  finger  at  
Zaphod.    
"Your  fault!"  he  screeched.    
"One  minute  thirty,"  muttered  Ford,  his  head  in  his  hands.    
"Yeah,  look  Great  Granddad,  can  you  actually  help  because..."    
"Help?"  exclaimed  the  old  man  as  if  he'd  been  asked  for  a  stoat.    
"Yeah,  help,  and  like,  now,  because  otherwise..."    
"Help!"  repeated  the  old  man  as  if  he'd  been  asked  for  a  lightly  
grilled  stoat  in  a  bun  with  French  fries.  He  stood  amazed.    
"You  go  swanning  your  way  round  the  Galaxy  with  your..."  the  
ancestor  waved  a  contemptuous  hand,  "with  your  disreputable  
friends,  too  busy  to  put  flowers  on  my  grave,  plastic  ones  would  have  
done,  would  have  been  quite  appropriate  from  you,  but  no.  Too  busy.  
Too  modern.  Too  sceptical  ʹ  till  you  suddenly  find  yourself  in  a  bit  of  a  
fix  and  come  over  suddenly  all  astrally-­‐minded!"    He  shook  his  head  ʹ  carefully,  so  as  not  to  disturb  the  slumber  of  
the  other  one,  which  was  already  becoming  restive.    
"Well,  I  don't  know,  young  Zaphod,"  he  continued,  "I  think  I'll  have  
to  think  about  this  one."    
"One  minute  ten,"  said  Ford  hollowly.    
Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  Fourth  peered  at  him  curiously.    
"Why  does  that  man  keep  talking  in  numbers?"  he  said.    
"Those  numbers,"  said  Zaphod  tersely,  "are  the  time  we've  got  left  
to  live."    
"Oh,"  said  his  great  grandfather.  He  grunted  to  himself.  "Doesn't  
apply  to  me,  of  course,"  he  said  and  moved  off  to  a  dimmer  recess  of  
the  bridge  in  search  of  something  else  to  poke  around  at.    
Zaphod  felt  he  was  teetering  on  the  edge  of  madness  and  
wondered  if  he  shouldn't  just  jump  over  and  have  done  with  it.    
"Great  Grandfather,"  he  said,  "It  applies  to  us!  We  are  still  alive,  
and  we  are  about  to  lose  our  lives."    
"Good  job  too."    
"What?"    
"What  use  is  your  life  to  anyone?  When  I  think  of  what  you've  
made  of  it  the  phrase  'pig's  ear'  comes  irresistibly  to  my  mind."    
"But  I  was  President  of  the  Galaxy,  man!"    
"Huh,"  muttered  his  ancestor,  "And  what  kind  of  a  job  is  that  for  a  
Beeblebrox?"    
"Hey,  what?  Only  President  you  know!  Of  the  whole  Galaxy!"    
"Conceited  little  megapuppy."    
Zaphod  blinked  in  bewilderment.    
"Hey,  er,  what  are  you  at,  man?  I  mean  Great  Grandfather."    
The  hunched  up  little  figure  stalked  up  to  his  great  grandson  and  
tapped  him  sternly  on  the  knee.  This  had  the  effect  of  reminding  
Zaphod  that  he  was  talking  to  a  ghost  because  he  didn't  feel  a  thing.    
"You  know  and  I  know  what  being  President  means,  young  Zaphod.  
You  know  because  you've  been  it,  and  I  know  because  I'm  dead  and  it  
gives  one  such  a  wonderfully  uncluttered  perspective.  We  have  a  
saying  up  here.  'Life  is  wasted  on  the  living.'"    
"Yeah,"  said  Zaphod  bitterly,  "very  good.  Very  deep.  Right  now  I  
need  aphorisms  like  I  need  holes  in  my  heads."    "Fifty  seconds,"  grunted  Ford  Prefect.    
"Where  was  I?"  said  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  the  Fourth.    
"Pontificating,"  said  Zaphod  Beeblebrox.    
"Oh  yes."    
"Can  this  guy,"  muttered  Ford  quietly  to  Zaphod,  "actually  in  fact  
help  us?"    
"Nobody  else  can,"  whispered  Zaphod.    
Ford  nodded  despondently.    
"Zaphod!"  the  ghost  was  saying,  "you  became  President  of  the  
Galaxy  for  a  reason.  Have  you  forgotten?"    
"Could  we  go  into  this  later?"    
"Have  you  forgotten!"  insisted  the  ghost.    
"Yeah!  Of  course  I  forgot!  I  had  to  forget.  They  screen  your  brain  
when  you  get  the  job  you  know.  If  they'd  found  my  head  full  of  tricksy  
ideas  I'd  have  been  right  out  on  the  streets  again  with  nothing  but  a  
fat  pension,  secretarial  staff,  a  fleet  of  ships  and  a  couple  of  slit  
throats."    
"Ah,"  nodded  the  ghost  in  satisfaction,  "then  you  do  remember!"    
He  paused  for  a  moment.    
"Good,"  he  said  and  the  noise  stopped.    
"Forty-­‐eight  seconds,"  said  Ford.  He  looked  again  at  his  watch  and  
tapped  it.  He  looked  up.    
"Hey,  the  noise  has  stopped,"  he  said.    
A  mischievous  twinkle  gleamed  in  the  ghost's  hard  little  eyes.    
"I've  slowed  down  time  for  a  moment,"  he  said,  "just  for  a  moment  
you  understand.  I  would  hate  you  to  miss  all  I  have  to  say."    
"No,  you  listen  to  me,  you  see-­‐through  old  bat,"  said  Zaphod  
leaping  out  of  his  chair,  "A  ʹ  thanks  for  stopping  time  and  all  that,  
great,  terrific,  wonderful,  but  B  ʹ  no  thanks  for  the  homily,  right?  I  
don't  know  what  this  great  think  I'm  meant  to  be  doing  is,  and  it  looks  
to  me  as  if  I  was  supposed  not  to  know.  And  I  resent  that,  right?    
"The  old  me  knew.  The  old  me  cared.  Fine,  so  far  so  hoopy.  Except  
that  the  old  me  cared  so  much  that  he  actually  got  inside  his  own  
brain  ʹ  my  own  brain  ʹ  and  locked  off  the  bits  that  knew  and  cared,  
because  if  I  knew  and  cared  I  wouldn't  be  able  to  do  it.  I  wouldn't  be  able  to  go  and  be  President,  and  I  wouldn't  be  able  to  steal  this  ship,  
which  must  be  the  important  thing.    
"But  this  former  self  of  mine  killed  himself  off,  didn't  he,  by  
changing  my  brain?  OK,  that  was  his  choice.  This  new  me  has  its  own  
choices  to  make,  and  by  a  strange  coincidence  those  choices  involve  
not  knowing  and  not  caring  about  this  big  number,  whatever  it  is.  
That's  what  he  wanted,  that's  what  he  got.    
"Except  this  old  self  of  mine  tried  to  leave  himself  in  control,  
leaving  orders  for  me  in  the  bit  of  my  brain  he  locked  off.  Well,  I  don't  
want  to  know,  and  I  don't  want  to  hear  them.  That's  my  choice.  I'm  
not  going  to  be  anybody's  puppet,  particularly  not  my  own."    
Zaphod  banged  the  console  in  fury,  oblivious  to  the  dumbfolded  
looks  he  was  attracting.    
"The  old  me  is  dead!"  he  raved,  "Killed  himself!  The  dead  shouldn't  
hang  about  trying  to  interfere  with  the  living!"    
"And  yet  you  summon  me  up  to  help  you  out  of  a  scrape,"  said  the  
ghost.    
"Ah,"  said  Zaphod,  sitting  down  again,  "well  that's  different  isn't  
it?"    
He  grinned  at  Trillian,  weakly.    
"Zaphod,"  rasped  the  apparition,  "I  think  the  only  reason  I  waste  
my  breath  on  you  is  that  being  dead  I  don't  have  any  other  use  for  it."    
"OK,"  said  Zaphod,  "why  don't  you  tell  me  what  the  big  secret  is.  
Try  me."    
"Zaphod,  you  knew  when  you  were  President  of  the  Galaxy,  as  did  
Yooden  Vranx  before  you,  that  the  President  is  nothing.  A  cipher.  
Somewhere  in  the  shadows  behind  is  another  man,  being,  something,  
with  ultimate  power.  That  man,  or  being,  or  something,  you  must  find  
ʹ  the  man  who  controls  this  Galaxy,  and  ʹ  we  suspect  ʹ  others.  
Possibly  the  entire  Universe."    
"Why?"    
"Why?"  exclaimed  an  astonished  ghost,  "Why?  Look  around  you  
lad,  does  it  look  to  you  as  if  it's  in  very  good  hands?"    
"It's  alright."    
The  old  ghost  glowered  at  him.    "I  will  not  argue  with  you.  You  will  simply  take  this  ship,  this  
Improbability  Drive  ship  to  where  it  is  needed.  You  will  do  it.  Don't  
think  you  can  escape  your  purpose.  The  Improbability  Field  controls  
you,  you  are  in  its  grip.  What's  this?"    
He  was  standing  tapping  at  one  of  the  terminals  of  Eddie  the  
Shipboard  Computer.  Zaphod  told  him.    
"What's  it  doing?"    
"It  is  trying,"  said  Zaphod  with  wonderful  restraint,  "to  make  tea."    
"Good,"  said  his  great  grandfather,  "I  approve  of  that.  Now  Zaphod,  
"he  said,  turning  and  wagging  a  finger  at  him,  "I  don't  know  if  you  are  
really  capable  of  succeeding  in  your  job.  I  think  you  will  not  be  able  to  
avoid  it.  However,  I  am  too  long  dead  and  too  tired  to  care  as  much  as  
I  did.  The  principal  reason  I  am  helping  you  now  is  that  I  couldn't  bear  
the  thought  of  you  and  your  modern  friends  slouching  about  up  here.  
Understood?"    
"Yeah,  thanks  a  bundle."    
"Oh,  and  Zaphod?"    
"Er,  yeah?"    
"If  you  ever  find  you  need  help  again,  you  know,  if  you're  in  trouble,  
need  a  hand  out  of  a  tight  corner..."    
"Yeah?"    
"Please  don't  hesitate  to  get  lost."    
Within  the  space  of  one  second,  a  bolt  of  light  flashed  from  the  
wizened  old  ghost's  hands  to  the  computer,  the  ghost  vanished,  the  
bridge  filled  with  billowing  smoke  and  the  Heart  of  Gold  leapt  an  
unknown  distance  through  the  dimensions  of  time  and  space.    
  
  
  
  Chapter  4    
  
Ten  light  years  away,  Gag  Halfrunt  jacked  up  his  smile  by  several  
notches.  As  he  watched  the  picture  on  his  vision  screen,  relayed  
across  the  sub-­‐ether  from  the  bridge  of  the  Vogon  ship,  he  saw  the  
final  shreds  of  the  Heart  of  Gold's  force-­‐shield  ripped  away,  and  the  
ship  itself  vanish  in  a  puff  of  smoke.    
Good,  he  thought.    
The  end  of  the  last  stray  survivors  of  the  demolition  he  had  
ordered  on  the  planet  Earth,  he  thought.    
The  final  end  of  this  dangerous  (to  the  psychiatric  profession)  and  
subversive  (also  to  the  psychiatric  profession)  experiment  to  find  the  
Question  to  the  Ultimate  Question  of  Life,  the  Universe,  and  
Everything,  he  thought.    
There  would  be  some  celebration  with  his  fellows  tonight,  and  in  
the  morning  they  would  meet  again  their  unhappy,  bewildered  and  
highly  profitable  patients,  secure  in  the  knowledge  that  the  Meaning  
of  Life  would  not  now  be,  once  and  for  all,  well  and  truly  sorted  out,  
he  thought.    
  
"Family's  always  embarrassing  isn't  it?"  said  Ford  to  Zaphod  as  the  
smoke  began  to  clear.    
He  paused,  then  looked  about.    
"Where's  Zaphod?"  he  said.    
Arthur  and  Trillian  looked  about  blankly.  They  were  pale  and  
shaken  and  didn't  know  where  Zaphod  was.    
"Marvin?"  said  Ford,  "Where's  Zaphod?"    
A  moment  later  he  said:    
"Where's  Marvin?"    
The  robot's  corner  was  empty.    The  ship  was  utterly  silent.  It  lay  in  thick  black  space.  Occasionally  it  
rocked  and  swayed.  Every  instrument  was  dead,  every  vision  screen  
was  dead.  They  consulted  the  computer.  It  said:    
"I  regret  that  I  have  been  temporarily  closed  to  all  communication.  
Meanwhile,  here  is  some  light  music."    
They  turned  off  the  light  music.    
They  searched  every  corner  of  the  ship  in  increasing  bewilderment  
and  alarm.  Everywhere  was  dead  and  silent.  Nowhere  was  there  any  
trace  of  Zaphod  or  of  Marvin.    
One  of  the  last  areas  they  checked  was  the  small  bay  in  which  the  
Nutri-­‐Matic  machine  was  located.    
On  the  delivery  plate  of  the  Nutri-­‐Matic  Drink  Synthesizer  was  a  
small  tray,  on  which  sat  three  bone  china  cups  and  saucers,  a  bone  
china  jug  of  milk,  a  silver  teapot  full  of  the  best  tea  Arthur  had  ever  
tasted,  and  a  small  printed  note  saying  "Wait".    
  
  
  
  Chapter  5    
  
Ursa  Minor  Beta  is,  some  say,  one  of  the  most  appalling  places  in  
the  known  Universe.    
Although  it  is  excruciatingly  rich,  horrifyingly  sunny  and  more  full  of  
wonderfully  exciting  people  than  a  pomegranate  is  of  pips,  it  can  
hardly  be  insignificant  that  when  a  recent  edition  of  Playbeing  
magazine  headlined  an  article  with  the  words  "When  you  are  tired  of  
Ursa  Minor  Beta  you  are  tired  of  life",  the  suicide  rate  quadrupled  
overnight.    
Not  that  there  are  any  nights  on  Ursa  Minor  Beta.    
It  is  a  West  Zone  planet  which  by  an  inexplicable  and  somewhat  
suspicious  freak  of  topography  consists  almost  entirely  of  sub-­‐tropical  
coastline.  By  an  equally  suspicious  freak  of  temporal  relastatics,  it  is  
nearly  always  Saturday  afternoon  just  before  the  beach  bars  close.    
No  adequate  explanation  for  this  has  been  forthcoming  from  the  
dominant  lifeforms  on  Ursa  Minor  Beta,  who  spend  most  of  their  time  
attempting  to  achieve  spiritual  enlightenment  by  running  round  
swimming  pools,  and  inviting  Investigation  Officials  form  the  Galactic  
Geo-­‐Temporal  Control  Board  to  "have  a  nice  diurnal  anomaly".    
There  is  only  one  city  on  Ursa  Minor  Beta,  and  that  is  only  called  a  
city  because  the  swimming  pools  are  slightly  thicker  on  the  ground  
there  than  elsewhere.    
If  you  approach  Light  City  by  air  ʹ  and  there  is  no  other  way  of  
approaching  it,  no  roads,  no  port  facilities  ʹ  if  you  don't  fly  they  don't  
want  to  see  you  in  Light  City  ʹ  you  will  see  why  it  has  this  name.  Here  
the  sun  shines  brightest  of  all,  glittering  on  the  swimming  pools,  
shimmering  on  the  white,  palm-­‐lined  boulevards,  glistening  on  the  
healthy  bronzed  specks  moving  up  and  down  them,  gleaming  off  the  
villas,  the  hazy  airpads,  the  beach  bars  and  so  on.    
Most  particularly  it  shines  on  a  building,  a  tall  beautiful  building  
consisting  of  two  thirty-­‐storey  white  towers  connected  by  a  bridge  
half-­‐way  up  their  length.    The  building  is  the  home  of  a  book,  and  was  built  here  on  the  
proceeds  of  an  extraordinary  copyright  law  suit  fought  between  the  
book's  editors  and  a  breakfast  cereal  company.    
The  book  is  a  guide  book,  a  travel  book.    
It  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable,  certainly  the  most  successful,  
books  ever  to  come  out  of  the  great  publishing  corporations  of  Ursa  
Minor  ʹ  more  popular  than  Life  Begins  at  Five  Hundred  and  Fifty,  
better  selling  than  The  Big  Bang  Theory  ʹ  A  Personal  View  by  
Eccentrica  Gallumbits  (the  triple  breasted  whore  of  Eroticon  Six)  and  
more  controversial  than  Oolon  Colluphid's  latest  blockbusting  title  
Everything  You  Never  Wanted  To  Know  About  Sex  But  Have  Been  
Forced  To  Find  Out.    
(And  in  many  of  the  more  relaxed  civilizations  on  the  Outer  Eastern  
Rim  of  the  Galaxy,  it  has  long  surplanted  the  great  Encyclopaedia  
Galactica  as  the  standard  repository  of  all  knowledge  and  wisdom,  for  
though  it  has  many  omissions  and  contains  much  that  is  apocryphal,  
or  at  least  wildly  inaccurate,  it  scores  over  the  older  and  more  
pedestrian  work  in  two  important  respects.  First,  it  is  slightly  cheaper,  
and  secondly  it  has  the  words  DON'T  PANIC  printed  in  large  friendly  
letters  on  its  cover.)    
It  is  of  course  that  invaluable  companion  for  all  those  who  want  to  
see  the  marvels  of  the  known  Universe  for  less  than  thirty  Altairan  
Dollars  a  day  ʹ  The  Hitchhiker's  Guide  to  the  Galaxy.    
If  you  stood  with  your  back  to  the  main  entrance  lobby  of  the  
Guide  offices  (assuming  you  had  landed  by  now  and  freshened  up  
with  a  quick  dip  and  shower)  and  then  walked  east,  you  would  pass  
along  the  leafy  shade  of  Life  Boulevard,  be  amazed  by  the  pale  golden  
colour  of  the  beaches  stretching  away  to  your  left,  astounded  by  the  
mind-­‐surfers  floating  carelessly  along  two  feet  above  the  waves  as  if  it  
was  nothing  special,  surprised  and  eventually  slightly  irritated  by  the  
giant  palm  trees  that  hum  toneless  nothings  throughout  the  daylight  
hours,  in  other  words  continuously.    
If  you  then  walked  to  the  end  of  Life  Boulevard  you  would  enter  
the  Lalamatine  district  of  shops,  bolonut  trees  and  pavement  cafes  
where  the  UM-­‐Betans  come  to  relax  after  a  hard  afternoon's  
relaxation  on  the  beach.  The  Lalamatine  district  is  one  of  those  very  
few  areas  which  doesn't  enjoy  a  perpetual  Saturday  afternoon  ʹ  it  enjoys  instead  the  cool  of  a  perpetual  early  Saturday  evening.  Behind  
it  lie  the  night  clubs.    
If,  on  this  particular  day,  afternoon,  stretch  of  eveningtime  ʹ  call  it  
what  you  will  ʹ  you  had  approached  the  second  pavement  cafe  on  the  
right  you  would  have  seen  the  usual  crowd  of  UM-­‐Betans  chatting,  
drinking,  looking  very  relaxed,  and  casually  glancing  at  each  other's  
watches  to  see  how  expensive  they  were.    
You  would  also  have  seen  a  couple  of  rather  dishevelled  looking  
hitch-­‐hikers  from  Algol  who  had  recently  arrived  on  an  Arcturan  
Megafreighter  aboard  which  they  had  been  roughing  it  for  a  few  days.  
They  were  angry  and  bewildered  to  discover  that  here,  within  sight  of  
the  Hitchhiker's  Guide  building  itself,  a  simple  glass  of  fruit  juice  cost  
the  equivalent  of  over  sixty  Altairan  dollars.    
"Sell  out,"  one  of  them  said,  bitterly.    
If  at  that  moment  you  had  then  looked  at  the  next  table  but  one  
you  would  have  seen  Zaphod  Beeblebrox  sitting  and  looking  very  
startled  and  confused.    
The  reason  for  his  confusion  was  that  five  seconds  earlier  he  had  
been  sitting  on  the  bridge  of  the  starship  Heart  of  Gold.    
"Absolute  sell  out,"  said  the  voice  again.    
Zaphod  looked  nervously  out  of  the  corners  of  his  eyes  at  the  two  
dishevelled  hitch-­‐hikers  at  the  next  table.  Where  the  hell  was  he?  
How  had  he  got  there?  Where  was  his  ship?  His  hand  felt  the  arm  of  
the  chair  on  which  he  was  sitting,  and  then  the  table  in  front  of  him.  
They  seemed  solid  enough.  He  sat  very  still.    
"How  can  they  sit  and  write  a  guide  for  hitch-­‐hikers  in  a  place  like  
this?"  continued  the  voice.  "I  mean  look  at  it.  Look  at  it!"    
Zaphod  was  looking  at  it.  Nice  place,  he  thought.  But  where?  And  
why?    
He  fished  in  his  pocket  for  his  two  pairs  of  sunglasses.  In  the  same  
pocket  he  felt  a  hard  smooth,  unidentified  lump  of  very  heavy  metal.  
He  pulled  it  out  and  looked  at  it.  He  blinked  at  it  in  surprise.  Where  
had  he  got  that?  He  returned  it  to  his  pocket  and  put  on  the  
sunglasses,  annoyed  to  discover  that  the  metal  object  had  scratched  
one  of  the  lenses.  Nevertheless,  he  felt  much  more  comfortable  with  
them  on.  They  were  a  double  pair  of  Joo  Janta  200  Super-­‐Chromatic  
Peril  Sensitive  Sunglasses,  which  had  been  specially  designed  to  help  people  develop  a  relaxed  attitude  to  danger.  At  the  first  hint  of  
trouble  they  turn  totally  black  and  thus  prevent  you  from  seeing  
anything  that  might  alarm  you.    
Apart  from  the  scratch  the  lenses  were  clear.  He  relaxed,  but  only  a  
little  bit.    
The  angry  hitch-­‐hiker  continued  to  glare  at  his  monstrously  
expensive  fruit  juice.    
"Worst  thing  that  ever  happened  to  the  Guide,  moving  to  Ursa  
Minor  Beta,"  he  grumbled,  "they've  all  gone  soft.  You  know,  I've  even  
heard  that  they've  created  a  whole  electronically  synthesized  
Universe  in  one  of  their  offices  so  they  can  go  and  research  stories  
during  the  day  and  still  go  to  parties  in  the  evening.  Not  that  day  and  
evening  mean  much  in  this  place."    
Ursa  Minor  Beta,  thought  Zaphod.  At  least  he  knew  where  he  was  
now.  He  assumed  that  this  must  be  his  great  grandfather's  doing,  but  
why?    
Much  to  his  annoyance,  a  thought  popped  into  his  mind.  It  was  
very  clear  and  very  distinct,  and  he  had  now  come  to  recognize  these  
thoughts  for  what  they  were.  His  instinct  was  to  resist  them.  They  
were  the  pre-­‐ordained  promptings  from  the  dark  and  locked  off  parts  
of  his  mind.    
He  sat  still  and  ignored  the  thought  furiously.  It  nagged  at  him.  He  
ignored  it.  It  nagged  at  him.  He  ignored  it.  It  nagged  at  him.  He  gave  in  
to  it.    
What  the  hell,  he  thought,  go  with  the  flow.  He  was  too  tired,  
confused  and  hungry  to  resist.  He  didn't  even  know  what  the  thought  
meant.    